X86 security extensions (#24)
CTSRD-CHERI/cheri-specification: chap-cheri-x86-64.tex

If the \insnxesref{XCHG} instructions \texttt{91} - \texttt{97} are not
commonly used, they could be removed in capability mode.

> \section{Relationship to x86 Security Extensions}

Reviewer: Add "Existing" before x86 perhaps?

memory sharing even where capability bounds overlap (by relying on
encryption) and where keys are
reused (by relying on capabilities).
Allowing parts of a cache line to be encrypted with different keys
could cause problems if we want to decrypt into the L1 cache, so the
key selector would likely need to be treated like an extension of
the physical address from the cache-tag perspective, with a distinct
copy of the cache line held for each key.

ME could also enable light-weight temporal safety for CHERI, where
the encryption key for new allocations is cycled while leaving the
memory unchanged.

\subsection{Intel MPK}

Intel's Memory Protection Keys (MPK) enables userspace filtering
of read/write permissions of 15 sets of pages.
The page table leaf entries themselves have a new 4-bit field to
identify a page set (or key), with the value 0 wired to unfiltered.
MPK was introduced with Skylake in 2015, and only appears to have
been enabled for Xeon processors.
AMD's Zen3 processors also appear to have MPK support since 2020,
presumably enabled for both consumer and professional variants.

In userspace, a thread may write its PKRU register, which maps

> 16 pairs of read/write permissions coorosponding to the 16 possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16 pairs of read/write permissions corresponding to the 16 possible
```

keys.
By writing this register, a thread may quickly remove access to subsets
of pages.
Current implementations appear to flush the back end of the pipeline,

> incuring a cycle penalty of roughly 20 cycles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
incurring a cycle penalty of roughly 20 cycles.
```

> This filtering is naturally per-thread, unlike the page table iteself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This filtering is naturally per-thread, unlike the page table itself
```

which is per-process, so it can be used for fine-grained thread-local
access for a few sensitive structures.
For example, secret keys might be stored in a region of memory that
is only briefly made accessible when necessary.

MPK has 3 major disadvantages compared to CHERI capabilities:
scaling, PKRU protection, and buffer sharing.

While MPK appears to be extremely unscalable on the surface, work
has been done to virtualise the page sets with an API similar to

> memprotect so that sets of pages can have their access permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mprotect so that sets of pages can have their access permissions
```

Reviewer: Not sure if you intend a specific memprotect() function distinct from the POSIX mprotect()?  If so, this might need a citation?

modified arbitrarily.
This can actually be implemented in the backend with mprotect
(with process-global semantics), or can be implemented with MPK
for sets whose permissions are changed frequently.
Nevertheless, there are likely to be serious scaling problems
if the abstraction library needs to resort to system calls that
traverse page tables to adjust permissions or mask ids.

> PKRU register is freely writable in user-mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PKRU register is freely writable in user-mode.
```

that WRPKRU cannot be executed by a compartment.

Finally, it us awkward to pass memory buffers between
compartments in MPK.
The most natural solution would be to use a new key
for memory that is shared between compartments, but
a compartment would need to explicitly allocate any
object that will be shared in this space which is not
as natural as CHERI which allows any local object
to be passed as an argument to another compartment.

\subsection{Intel MPX (deprecated)}

Intel's Memory Protection Extension (MPX) was designed to accelerate
bounds checking with various usage models.
MPX shipped commercially in 2015 with Skylake, the only high-end
processor that has supported the extension.
MPX is a complex extension
with new instructions, new special-purpose registers, new tables,
as well as new configuration and status registers.

MPX introduced four new 128-bit BND registers to hold both an
upper and a lower bound for a range, along with instructions
to move bounds between registers and memory.
MPX also introduced instructions to create bounds and compare integer
values to the bounds;
upper and lower bounds are compared with separate
instructions.

> MPX further introduces two table access instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MPX further introduced two table access instructions
```

for loading and storing bounds for any pointer in memory
from a table.

> Each leaf entry in the table is 32-bytes, including 8 bytes for each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each leaf entry in the table was 32-bytes, including 8 bytes for each
```

of the bounds and 8-bytes to hold a copy of the expected pointer value.

> Using these instructions, a program can be compiled to stash
> bounds for each pointer in memory in a shadow space, loading
> and storing bounds whenever pointers themselves are loaded and stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using these instructions, a program could be compiled to stash
bounds for each pointer in memory in a shadow space, loading
and storing bounds whenever pointers themselves were loaded and stored.
```

\subsubsection{MPX Shortcomings}

MPX had critical shortcomings from two directions: security and
performance.

MPX was designed to maximise compatibility.
As a result, MPX "failed open" in many cases where unexpected
cases arose.
If the pointer from the bounds table did not match the pointer

> from memory, bounds were left in state that would not fault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from memory, bounds were left in a state that would not fault.
```

of a program, though SPEC averaged 100\% memory overhead
due to the sparse table structure.
Furthermore, limitations on execution units that could
execute bounds checks meant that instructions-per-cycle
was usually lower for a MPX program than for a standard
program despite the instruction bloat.

With no hard security guarantees and performance competitive
With similar software schemes, MPX adoption
was abysmal and was deprecated after one generation of
hardware.

\subsubsection{MPX Lessons for CHERI-x86-64}

CHERI sacrifices ABI compatibility for firm security guarantees
and performance.
While the x86 community has placed great emphasis on backward
compatibility, CHERI-x86-64 must resist the pressure
to cleverly enable compatibility in any way that compromises
security.

In addition, CHERI-x86-64 implementors should resist the pressure
to leave CHERI de-optimised under the assumption that security
is a niche application.
CHERI is designed for overheads within 5\% of unprotected
performance in most cases, but a few corner cases in forwarding
or branch prediction can easily push overheads over 20\% and
greatly restrict adoption.

> \subsection{Intel SGX (deprecated)}

Reviewer: I don't think SGX is deprecated fully (unlike MPX).  Intel has dropped it from "consumer" CPUs, but Xeons still ship it I believe according to https://community.intel.com/t5/Blogs/Products-and-Solutions/Security/Rising-to-the-Challenge-Data-Security-with-Intel-Confidential/post/1353141

Intel SGX is a very complex extension to enable a user-space
application to trust the processor to provide enclave memory that is
not readable or modifiable from the operating system or even
outside the CPU package.
Some instructions required for this extension are in the style
of function calls.
The ECREATE instruction takes a pointer to a struct as an argument,
which requests a contiguous range of virtual address space.
This causes the hardware to allocate a number of structures in a
reserved region of DRAM to track memory for the enclave before
executing the next instruction.
The EADD instruction copies a page of common memory into a
newly-allocated enclave page, keeping a running hash of its contents.

CHERI relies on simple invariants that can be enforced within
single-cycle instructions.
Intel SGX instead trusts the correctness and atomicity of

> hyper-visor-like subroutine calls due to their being

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hypervisor-like subroutine calls due to their being
```

provided by processor firmware.

> On one hand, the SGX precedent suggests that trusted hyper-visor-like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On one hand, the SGX precedent suggests that trusted hypervisor-like
```

subroutines can be implemented in the CPU.

> On the other hand, Intel SGX was only implemented in a single Intel

Reviewer: I'm not sure these next two sentences are accurate.  Intel's current top-of-line Xeon processors ship SGX: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/details/processors/xeon/scalable/platinum.html
